---
layout: review
title: "Dare to <cite>Stray</cite> From the Mainstream"
image: /images/stray/hero.jpg
author: Sidneys1
info:
  cover: /images/stray/cover.jpg
  title: Stray
  rating: 8
  date: "2022-07-19"
  author: BlueTwelve Studio
  publisher: Annapurna Interactive
tags: [video-games]
categories: [reviews]
# pros: []
# cons: []
subtitle: Do you have what it takes to be a Stray?
toc: true
# mastodon_comment_url:
# erratum: []
---

There's something uniquely tantalizing to humans about imagining living the life of a cat. The agility of their motion,
the supreme laziness of the crepuscular sleep cycle, the serene stoicism with which our domesticated companions face the
world... We itch for this simpler way of life. Perhaps this fantasy is, in part, a fallacy, tainted by the lavish and
lazy life we ourselves have afforded our feline friends. <cite>Stray</cite> has seemingly been concocted to both scratch
this itch and to challenge the fantasy that life as a cat is easy.

<!--more-->

## Editorial

*This section is a retelling of the first twenty minutes or so of the game, highlighting various
<span>praises</span>{:.praise} and <span>critiques</span>{:.critique} I noted therein. If you wish, you can skip ahead
to the [Â§Critical Analysis](#critical-analysis).*{: .slight}

Stray starts off with a cozy scene: we are a cat -- a pretty adorable one -- and we're living with our pack in an
overgrown maintenance hallway of sorts. The hallway is open at one end to a rainstorm thundering away outside the open
end of our alcove, giving us a window into a vast canyon of concrete and metal. The game guides us through a few
intuitive basic controls as we interact with the other cats around us and explore our small world. Here we get our first
good look at the graphics of the game: beautiful green vegetation covers the sides of the hallway, all but completely
hiding fantastically grungy concrete walls and floors, rusty metal pipes, and a clearly abandoned metal hatchway. As we
interact with each of our cat friends, they slowly gather together on a piece of discarded box. Eventually we curl up to
join them, cozy and safe in defiance of the storm outside, and sleep takes us.

When we awake, the storm has gone, and so have our bedmates. A beautiful and strong depth of field effect highlights our
protagonist, framed by a backdrop of golden sunlight streaming down. We're an orange tabby with large green eyes; <span
class="critique" title="Critique">here I was a little underwhelmed by the fur shader in use -- perhaps a higher-fidelity
look could have been employed for close-up shots during cinematic sequences</span>. We awake, and the game shows off
some beautiful animation of cats in motion as we stretch and move towards the opening of our hallway and, following our
friends, drop onto an unseen platform below.

From here, we enjoy the acrobatic abilities that only cats can make seem effortless as we cross a series of pipes and
ledges, always following our cat pack. Our environment seems to be some long-abandoned sewer system, a deep canyon of
concrete and metal left to rot and be overtaken by creeping vines. A series of increasingly daring leaps allows the game
to gently assure us that we are safe, to give us confidence in our agility as a feline acrobat, and to relax and enjoy
life, if but for a few moments. But like all good stories, our security is fleeting, and our journey must get underway
-- the box cover and [marketing][stray-trailer]{: target="_blank"} promises a cyberpunk dystopia of dark alleyways,
mysterious mechanical people, and skin-crawling bio-horror unimaginable... All this we will not find in this sunlit
land. And so, with bated breath, we await the inevitable turning point in our care-free lives and are soon rewarded. A
cinematic sequence of our pack-mates jumping across a wide break in a rusty pipe, dangling precariously over a sheer
drop, foretells our fate. One by one, they cross, the far side of the pipe bending further towards a breaking point with
each landing. Shimmering sunlight falling on emerald creeping vines whispers lies of comfort and security, but we know
what must come next. It is our turn to cross, and knowing what will come does not soften the cruel twist of fate any
more, as gritting our teeth disaster strikes. The pipe gives way under our weight, as little as it may be, and we fall
with a sorrowful *\*meow\**. A dramatic camera angle recalls the trauma of the first act climax of <cite>The Lion
King</cite> as we try to save ourselves at the edge of a slope -- but our fate has been written, and we slip down into
the darkness below.

[stray-trailer]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kJawWyRUOBM

---
{: .short-rule}

After a long fade to black, we arise; struggling to stand, but alive. Down here there is no sunlight, and a thick fog is
pierced occasionally by harsh fluorescent light illuminating mountains of refuse. The color grading has changed
significantly as well; gone are the warm yellow tones of daylight, replaced with a cold, deep blue. We limp about for a
moment, only to collapse again and fade to blackness. But here we are now shown other signs of life in this cold hell;
as we lay unconscious, a cinematic reveals a large door. A light blinks to life beside it; cyan-blue screens of text
illuminate, then a large red light, striking against the blue hue of this forgotten sewer. The door begins to open
unrequited: we are not alone in this world. A moment later, the point is confirmed again as two... creatures? dart from
behind some garbage through the opening door. This first fleeting glance is barely enough to form a picture of the
creatures in one's mind -- large, hairless rodents? No, too round. Insects, perhaps? But again, no, too fleshy, save
perhaps some mutantly large tick or flea. More than anything, perhaps, images are conjured of the head-crabs from
Valve's <cite>Half-Life</cite> -- grotesque mounds of flesh on short, skittering legs. Yes, this is body horror, and we
are meant to be instinctively afraid.

We awake, no longer limping, pausing a moment to lick our wounds and start afresh, but finding nowhere to go but the
dark door and the horror that we know lies behind. We enter, deftly slinking between the bars of a grate in what I find
to be <span class="praise" title="Praise">one of the more magical small details of <cite>Stray</cite>: the effortless
fluidity of motion that immediately rings true to my mind as that of a cat</span>. Emerging on the other side, the door
closing behind us, we find ourselves in a clearly neglected alleyway. Here we see more evidence of civilization long
forgotten -- or long abandoned. Garbage lies everywhere, in great sweeping piles like snowdrift; scaffolding belies
attempts at maintenance, long since forgotten. From nearly every window protrudes an air conditioning unit, suggesting
to my mind at least a culture of consumerism and personal comfort trumping economy and ecology -- could these be some of
the failings that led to this apocalyptic scene?

A title overlay shows some unknown glyphs[^1] and the English-language translation <q>Dead City</q>; foreboding nothing
good. As we walk forward, more of the mysterious creatures take notice and scurry away, this time allowing us a glimpse
of glowing yellow eyes. Beyond this, nothing else seems to move at first, until our eyes grow accustomed to the
disarray, and we begin to notice the little automatic motions that we've learned to ignore - small bits of cloth
fluttering in some silent motion of stagnant air; or the fans on air conditioning units still turning, cooling rooms for
seemingly no one, dutifully laboring for some unknown eternity. <span class="praise" title="Praise">This theme -- these
automatic, mechanical actions, continuing on when long since abandoned -- is well woven into the fabric of
<cite>Stray</cite>; we will notice it more throughout, sometimes more or less obvious</span>. As we continue, we begin
to notice another, more direct -- more direct*ed* -- sign of life: literal signs themselves begin to illuminate our
path, beckoning us to some unknown goal. Most have arrows, directing some long-gone citizen of this city to a noodle
shop or perhaps a used electronics store; but no longer, now they are directing us some*where*. A few small security
cameras, easy to miss save their glowing red eye, seem to be following our motion. Some*thing* is watching and guiding.
Some*one* -- or perhaps, at the very least, some intelligence -- is beckoning us.

[^1]:
    Josh Wirtanen managed to <ruby style="ruby-position: under; ruby-align: center;">
    [decode the game's alphabet][stray-lang]{:target="_blank"}
    <rt>Archived at: [Archive.is][stray-lang-archive-is]{:target="_blank" .no-arrow},
    [Wayback Machine][stray-lang-archive-org]{:target="_blank" .no-arrow}.</rt>
    </ruby> on release day!

    The text for this particular overlay reads <q>CITY</q> on line one, and <q>DEAD CITY</q> on line two.

[stray-lang]: https://halfglassgaming.com/2022/07/i-completely-decoded-strays-code-language-heres-a-guide-to-deciphering-it/
[stray-lang-archive-is]: https://archive.is/20220831011257/https://halfglassgaming.com/2022/07/i-completely-decoded-strays-code-language-heres-a-guide-to-deciphering-it/
[stray-lang-archive-org]: https://web.archive.org/web/20240830173041/https://halfglassgaming.com/2022/07/i-completely-decoded-strays-code-language-heres-a-guide-to-deciphering-it/


Our suspicions are confirmed before long, as an array of worn screens displays a brightly glowing but clear sign: more
arrows, but also the words <q>FOLLOW ME</q> and crude images of a cat. So we are being watched by some unknown
intelligence. To what end do they lead us? Save our pack-mates -- hardly a thought in our mind now as we creep through
dark alleys -- we have seen no kindness down here in the dark. But we have no other options, no alternate routes to
take, no prayer of following our own fortune. So follow we will. Here we reach the game's first puzzle, if you can call
it that. I'll admit, it took me longer than I had hoped to solve. A spinning fan blocks our path, obvious in its
deadliness through its speed and the glint of sheer metal. Searching for some moments for an alternate route among the
shadows of pipework and ledges proves fruitless, and eventually my listlessness found me retracing steps, unknowingly
walking past the key to the puzzle several times before noticing a small icon prompting me to pick up a small bucket of
some sort. Returning to the fan realizes the secret of the curiously sloped floor: dropping the bucket into the fan
halts it suddenly. I felt stupid here -- apparently a bit cat-brained myself. I'll not hold it against the level
designers, as even I, the lowest denominator, figured it out eventually. <span class="critique"
title="Critique">However, this decries an unfortunate theme throughout many of the puzzles of <cite>Stray</cite>: *find
an impossibly small item in a large, dark area to progress*</span>. A trope, to be sure, and certainly nothing to avoid
entirely when designing a game; however, <span class="critique" title="Critique">its repetition in this game borders on
the pathological, leaving the player mired in an hour or more of "fetch quests."</span>

My frustration subsiding, we continue on and are immediately granted some catharsis by the relaxing experience of
pushing paint cans off a high ledge into darkness below, where, distantly and after a moment's bated breath, we hear a
soft *clang* as each can finds the ground. <span class="praise" title="Praise">It's easy -- or was for me at least -- to
get caught up in a moment such as this; the desire to remain here, unbothered by our troubles, and just *be a cat* for a
few minutes</span>. All too soon, however, we run out of cans, and must continue on, unaware that the game has deftly
given us a clue on how to solve our next puzzle: a room we cannot access. Armed with the rigorous training we've just
received, however, this proves to be not nearly as frustrating a task as my last trial, and we soon have bent the brute
force of gravity to our will and entered the room via a skylight. It seems no one had included a can of paint on a ledge
above in their risk assessment for this architectural piece.

Our access granted, we slip inside a modest apartment, still following the glowing directions from occasional
televisions and screens. They guide us from apartment, to street, to yet another glimpsed encounter with the strange
creatures with the glowing eyes, who as before scuttle away into dark corners. But here we find, instead of a pile of
discarded junk, that the creatures were gathered around a mechanical person of sort, prone in the street -- or rather,
the head, torso, and single arm of a mechanical man. As we approach its head raises suddenly and we find that they --
*they*, for it does seem like an intelligence resides within -- are still "alive," as it were, startling our feline
character. An on-screen indicator prompts us to get closer, to communicate... But as we approach, tapping its head
gently with ours in a universal sign of compassion, it drops lifeless to the ground; it seems we were too late to be of
any help. Signs continue to guide us forward, away from the heap of metal now devoid of the spark of life -- mechanical,
electronic life, perhaps, but *life* nonetheless; <span class="praise" title="Praise">it *felt* alive. Herein lies
another praise for the developers of <cite>Stray</cite>: the game is inhabited almost strictly by things not alive (save
ourselves and the strange creatures), and yet everything feels *so alive*</span>.

---
{: .short-rule }

I could wax long, retelling moments of the game like this. I wanted to specifically cover the first 20 minutes or so of
the game, as it deftly covers a wide array of the themes of <cite>Stray</cite> in quite a compact format. These 20
minutes almost entirely cover my critiques and praises as well -- a fact that I believe illustrates the consistency of
the game. For now I will leave the reader to discover the rest for themselves, and instead end the editorial review and
continue with a more critical approach.

## Critical Analysis

### Plot

<cite>Stray</cite> is well written; remarkably so, even, for a game with little dialog.

### Gameplay

<cite>Stray</cite>'s gameplay is extremely simple, you have control over the motion of the cat, plus a few smaller
controls allowing you to turn on or off a flashlight, consult your robot friend, or view your inventory and unlocked
memories. The core of the gameplay revolves not around complexity or even necessarily puzzle-solving so much as the
plot that emerges through set pieces or encounters with the denizens of this fallen world.

That said, there are specific sections of gameplay that lean more or less heavily on a variety of genres of gameplay.
There are chase/horror sequences, escaping from almost alien creatures; these sections of the game evolve at around the
halfway point, where you acquire a "weapon" of sorts and are able to fight back.
There are puzzles of varying difficulty and wit, some with quite intricate environmental clues.
There are stealth levels, where you must hide from quite powerful robotic sentinels; there is little to no leeway here,
if you are spotted you are quite efficiently dispatched, and you get the notion quickly that you are meant to *not be
seen at all*.
There are a few small maze-like areas, which while not complex do offer a short respite for those who enjoy them.
And finally, the story requires that you form relationships and solve a few detective-like puzzles, questioning denizens
of the dead city in order to find various items required to progress the plot.

### Level Design

### Graphics & Art

- Fur shader critique

### Secrets & Easter Eggs
